                                                       Challenges and opportunities for digital twins in
                                                      precision medicine: a complex systems perspective
arXiv:2405.09649v1 [physics.bio-ph] 15 May 2024




                                                                         Manlio De Domenico 1,2,3∗ , Luca Allegri1 , Guido Caldarelli4,5,6 ,
                                                                         Valeria d’Andrea1 , Barbara Di Camillo2,7,8 ,Luis M. Rocha9,10 ,
                                                                           Jordan Rozum9 , Riccardo Sbarbati1 , Francesco Zambelli1

                                                        1
                                                            Department of Physics and Astronomy “Galileo Galilei”. University of Padova, Padova, Italy
                                                                                   2
                                                                                       Padua Center for Network Medicine, University of Padua.
                                                                                           3
                                                                                          Padua Neuroscience Center, University of Padua.
                                                                                    4
                                                                                        DSMN and ECLT Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Italy.
                                                                    5
                                                                        Institute of Complex Systems (ISC) CNR unit Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
                                                                        6
                                                                            London Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Royal Institution, London, UK.
                                                                               7
                                                                                 Department of Information Engineering, University of Padua, Italy
                                                              8
                                                                  Department of Comparative Biomedicine and Food Science, University of Padua, Italy
                                                  9
                                                      Department of Systems Science and Industrial Eng., Binghamton University, Binghamton, NY, USA.
                                                                                          10
                                                                                          Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
                                                                                  ∗
                                                                                    Corresponding author. E-mail: manlio.dedomenico@unipd.it


                                                         The adoption of digital twins (DTs) in precision medicine is increasingly vi-
                                                         able, propelled by extensive data collection and advancements in artificial in-

                                                         telligence (AI), alongside traditional biomedical methodologies. However, the
                                                         reliance on black-box predictive models, which utilize large datasets, presents
                                                         limitations that could impede the broader application of DTs in clinical set-

                                                         tings. We argue that hypothesis-driven generative models, particularly multi-
                                                         scale modeling, are essential for boosting the clinical accuracy and relevance
                                                         of DTs, thereby making a significant impact on healthcare innovation. This


                                                                                                             1
      paper explores the transformative potential of DTs in healthcare, emphasiz-
      ing their capability to simulate complex, interdependent biological processes

      across multiple scales. By integrating generative models with extensive datasets,
      we propose a scenario-based modeling approach that enables the exploration
      of diverse therapeutic strategies, thus supporting dynamic clinical decision-

      making. This method not only leverages advancements in data science and
      big data for improving disease treatment and prevention but also incorporates
      insights from complex systems and network science, quantitative biology, and

      digital medicine, promising substantial advancements in patient care.


Introduction

Precision medicine aims at delivering diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic strategies specifi-
cally tailored to individuals by explicitly accounting for their genetic information, lifestyle and
environment [1], all organised in a network structure[2]. The success of this approach relies

on at least two fundamental and non-trivial assumptions. The first assumption is that it is pos-
sible to predict, by means of computational, cellular, and organism models and to some level
of accuracy, the response of a patient to a specific treatment. The second assumption is that it

is possible to use heterogeneous data sources (multiomics, electronic health records, individual
and social behavior, and so forth) to build massive databases with enough statistics to allow

one to stratify a population with respect to characterizing and distinctive features of clinical
interest [3].
    It is not surprising that the field of precision medicine is growing [4, 5], attracting the in-

terest of national health systems for investments [6] and of scholars spanning a wide range of
disciplines, from molecular biology to computer science, medicine, physics, and engineering.
Nevertheless, precision medicine, with its revolutionary promises, is usually associated with

                                                2
clinical genomics [7] and multiomics [8], with a strong focus on the idea that combining those
heterogeneous, multi-scale sources of data will lead to timely predictions about individual med-

ical outcomes. More recently, the attention shifted to the possibility of integrating such molec-
ular data with traditional [9, 10, 11] and non-traditional [12] data sources of clinical relevance
into a multiscale predictive modeling methodology known as a digital twin, that allows for test-

ing therapeutic strategies in-silico with the ultimate goal of maximizing successful treatments
and outcomes.
   The first pioneering precursors of digital twins for personalized medicine came out in the

early 2000’, proposing the idea of models of the human body for specific patients to improve
clinical practices. They pointed out challenges that are still actual, such as the need of a structure
for multiple sources data integration [13] and the importance of having solid mathematical

models able to describe the system at the desired level of precision [14]. In the last years
medical digital twins (MDT) have experienced a huge increase of interest, with the birth of
many programmes devoted to them [15, 16]. Some of the most significant successes in the field

are the “artificial pancreas” or ARCHIMEDES program on diabetes [17], or mechanistic models
of the heart used for cardiovascular disease monitoring and prevention [18, 19]. Recent works
emphasize the potentiality of having a comprehensive model for the human body that could help

to understand what could be the possible consequences of a perturbation, for example caused
by a viral infection [20], or the influence of specific drugs [21, 22], on a specific patient. About
the actual implementation of these models, network and complex systems are starting to be

considered [15] after more than one decade from first proposals [], while approached based on
AI and ML are widely adopted despite some limitations and critical aspects [23]. Given the
broad spectrum of definitions and applications, it is important to set the operational definition

that will be adopted throughout this paper:




                                                  3
   A digital twin is an in-silico framework which can be used to replicate a biological
   cell, sub-system, organ or a whole organism with a transparent predictive model of
   their relevant causal mechanisms which responds in the same manner to interven-
   tions.


   Broadly speaking, a digital twin exchanges data with its real-world counterpart, synchroniz-
ing inputs and outputs, and together, they operate synergistically, with the digital twin inform-
ing, controlling, aiding, and augmenting the original system.

   In fact, in the recent years the interest on digital twins exploded well beyond medicine, due
to the increasing accessibility to memories, computational power and massive data gathering.
Primarily utilized to simulate the intricate infrastructural configurations, they have been also

applied to cities [24] and products [25], leveraging contemporary technologies such as data
analytics, IoT-driven physical modeling[26], machine learning and artificial intelligence. For
instance, in the case of cities [27], it has been argued that it can be far more efficient to consider

the emerging behaviour arising from the intricate web of relationships, processes and correla-
tions that characterize a complex adaptive system [28, 29, 30], rather than reproducing a mere
copy of it.

   The comparison with current methodological advances and challenges in other fields, allows
us to highlight the existing challenges in the case of precision medicine. Despite promising
opportunities to create a digital copy of every individual to allow for personalized analysis and

test individual-specific therapeutic strategies [21, 31, 15] there are some caveats that might be
considered.
   On the one hand, if digital twins must be designed to be a perfect replica of an individual,

then the amount of required data vastly overcomes our present, and even the future, possibil-
ities. The gigantic number of intervening functional units, from biomolecules to cells, makes
any analytical or computational approach impossible. Even in the ideal case that a perfectly


                                                  4
functioning computational framework was technologically accessible, the nonlinear dynamics
of interacting biological units leads to emergent phenomena that cannot be simply simulated or

predicted, a landmark feature of complex systems [32, 33]. In fact, recent advances in predictive
biology are based on building models of increasing complexity to reproduce the most salient
characteristics of complex biological processes in engineered and natural populations [34].

    On the other hand, human patients have their own dynamical response to internal dys-
functions or differentiated coupling to the environment, including individual histories of host-
microbiome and host-pathogen interactions, that might jeopardize any predictive model. Even

more widely, the full individual exposome includes all past exposure to specific multi-scale
environmental factors, such as diet and reactions to stressful biochemical or social condi-
tions [35, 36]. While the causal mechanisms in multiomic regulation can be partially recon-

structed and accounted for, the full individual exposome is almost impossible to replicate or
reproduce with a digital twin.
    We have made great strides in capturing the exposome via collection of new types of data,

such as mobile devices [37] and social media [12], However, even in the most ideal cases, un-
known factors such as the level of disease progression and unmeasured lifestyle changes can
lead to a broad set of distinct outcomes that make the design of digital twins very sensitive to

the quantity and accuracy of input data. This technology may struggle to adapt and accurately
predict these dynamic changes, leading to sub-optimal personalized treatment recommenda-
tions.

    The aforementioned potential issues can dramatically hinder the purpose of digital twins,
suggesting that only methods based on advanced statistical data analysis, such as the one based
on machine learning, are viable. However, this is not the case, since such methods provide

predictive models that (i) do not easily generalize to situations and conditions for which they
have not been trained for, and (ii) might recommend solutions that are clinically sub-optimal


                                               5
when retrieving multiple outcomes which are similarly ranked by the algorithm (Fig. 1).
   Therefore, a more comprehensive approach based on methods capturing the essential fea-

tures of complex interconnected and interdependent systems [38, 39] at many scales is needed.
This approach needs to: (i) reduce the dimensionality of the problem of interest, by identifying
the key biological, clinical and environmental variables to use for an adequate description on

short time scales; (ii) characterize under which conditions a complex adaptive system like the
human body (or even a cell line) can be simulated by a digital twin in terms of separated com-
ponents and/or sub-systems; (iii) provide a transparent computational framework for testing

actionable intervention strategies based on what-if scenarios and clinically relevant, model-
informed, data-driven and evidence-based questions.
   In short, this calls for more holistic and quantitative approach based on the complex adaptive

nature of every patient rather than a mere replica of their salient aspects for statistical analysis.


Multiscale modeling in health and disease: from genes to sys-
tems

Accounting for the multiscale nature of biological systems is of paramount importance for de-
signing effective digital twins. The recent progresses in study of complex systems, especially
the ones with interconnected and interdependent structure, dynamics and function, provide a

promising ground for figuring out and illustrating how diverse functional units and sub-systems
interact at different scales. Indeed, in addition to extracting multiscale molecular details from
large omics datasets (e.g., transcriptomic, genomic, metabolomic, and microbiomic), we can

now extract large-scale human behavior data of biomedical relevance from social media, mo-
bile devices and electronic health records, including new patient-stratification principles and
unknown disease correlations [12, 37, 9, 40, 41, 11, 42]. Accordingly, the holistic integra-

tion and analysis of such multiscale data sources constitutes a novel opportunity to further

                                                  6
                                     Organs
                                     and Tissues
                                     Data


                                            Environmental
                                            and Lifestyle
                                            Data




                                     Genetic
                                     Regulatory
                                     Data

                                 Cellular
                                 Data

                                                  Historical
                                                  Data



                    Input: massive                        Processing: models       Output: Digital Twins to test and select
                   amounts of data                     find correlations in data          treatment of the patient




Figure 1: Precision medicine standard approach for digital twins. The framework relies
on using large-scale heterogeneous data sources (pre-clinical, clinical, environmental, lifestyle,
etc.). This massive database should be used by sophisticated computational models (such as
deep learning), while relying solely on statistical data analysis to construct a series of digitalized
instances – the digital twins – of a patient, which will then be used to test one or more therapeutic
strategies for clinical decision-making. Human body design by Freepick and osteocytes from
Servier Medical Art under CC-BY AS license.

improve personalization by including the exposome in the study of multilevel human complex-
ity in disease [41, 43], and used to inform more accurate models for predictive purposes in

biomedicine [44, 34, 42, 45, 46].
   At the lowest scale, gene regulatory networks are systems of interacting genes and their
regulatory elements within a cell controlling the level of gene expression. Usually, in those

networks the nodes represent genes and edges represent regulatory interactions between them,
and they describe the timing, spatial distribution, and intensity of gene expression, thereby

                                                                    7
orchestrating various cellular processes such as development, differentiation, and response to
environmental stimuli [47, 48, 49, 50]. A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network captures

distinct types of interactions (e.g., physical contacts) between proteins in a cell. In PPI net-
works, nodes represent individual proteins, and edges encode interactions between them: they
can be transient, like in signal transduction, or more stable, such as in the formation of protein

complexes [51, 52]. PPI networks provide insights into cellular processes, functional asso-
ciations, and the modular organization of proteins, and analyzing the structure and dynamics
of PPI networks helps uncover the underlying principles of cellular organization and func-

tion [53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 45]. Metabolic networks [60, 61, 42] map out the biochemical
reactions occurring within an organism, detailing how individual metabolites are synthesized,
degraded, and interconverted [62]. These networks are either composed of nodes representing

metabolites and edges indicating the enzymatic reactions facilitating the transformation from
one metabolite to another or bipartite networks where nodes are chemical species on one side
and reactions on the other. In this latter representation, the web of metabolic interactions is

more intricately woven, while in the former it is more straightforward. Beyond individual re-
actions, these networks highlight the interconnected nature of metabolic pathways, revealing
redundancies, feedback loops, and regulatory mechanisms that maintain cellular homeostasis.

   Intracellular networks have time-evolving states that describe which genes are active, which
proteins are present (or phosphorylated, oxidized, ubiquitinated, etc.), the concentrations of
metabolites, and so on. State evolution is often studied using ODE models, which can be fit to

match experimental state and kinetic data [63]. In many cases, the available data is insufficient
to fully constrain the parameters of an ODE model, or, which is often the case, the underly-
ing biological dynamics is of a threshold nature [64]. In these cases, a discrete causal model,

such as Boolean networks (or multistate automata networks more generally), may be appro-
priate [65, 66]. In a Boolean network, the state of each node in the intracellular network is


                                                8
binarized: a gene is either active or inactive, and the active form of a protein is either above
some unspecified threshold of abundance or below it. The binarized states change in time ac-

cording to logical (Boolean) update functions, i.e., each network node is an automaton [67].
The causal effect of various interventions (e.g. drugs) can be evaluated by manipulating the
states of individual nodes and observing the resulting dynamics. Since Boolean automata can

be grouped to model variables with more than two states, the approach is widely applicable to
model cellular components with various levels of activation, e.g. proportion of cells that enter
apoptosis in breast cancer cell lines [68]. A common application of these models is to study

the effects of combinatorial drug interventions, particularly in the context of cancer [68, 69].
To serve as a component of a digital twin, Boolean networks must reconcile their discrete time
steps with physical time. This is often done by updating node states asynchronously accord-

ing to tunable node transition rates, essentially treating the dynamics as a continuous Markov
process [70]. This approach has been applied, for example, to suggest personalized drug thera-
pies for prostate cancer patients using personalized Boolean network models [71]. This discrete

dynamics approach has also been used to infer important dynamical pathways in multilayer
networks, tying molecular factors (from multiomics, brain and retinal imaging data) to clinical
phenotype (from patient data) in multiple sclerosis [46]. This is an exciting avenue that allows

complex regulatory dynamics to be studied on static multilayer networks obtained from het-
erogeneous data sources, whereby each node can integrate incoming signals differently—going
well beyond the typical analysis via spreading or information dynamics on networks.

   It is important to note that automata network models can typically be greatly simplified by
reducing dynamically redundant interactions [67], due to the ubiquity of canalized dynamics
in biology [72, 73]. This results in scalable causal models capable of uncovering actionable

interventions, conditioned on different input assumptions, in a transparent manner [67, 64, 74].
Boolean networks are especially amenable to causal analysis because they can be converted to


                                               9
simplified causal representations (according to Boolean minimization criteria) [67, 64, 75, 76],
standing in stark contrast to the black-box predictions of traditional machine learning methods

or tallying the outputs of Monte Carlo simulations of large dynamical models (including non-
simplified Boolean Networks.)
   Thus, automata network models—whose parameters can be inferred and validated from

perturbation experiment, multiomics, and exposome data—are ideal components to consider
for the top level of digital twins, as they synthesize the large-scale underlying data into simpli-
fied, explainable, causal networks amenable investigate actionable interventions. Indeed, these

features show how this modeling approach directly responds to the digital twin approach needs
identified in the introduction: dimensionality reduction, scalable modularity, and transparency.
   Whether discrete or continuous, the dynamics of intracellular networks can be coupled with

each other and with physical processes to produce whole-cell models, which attempt to describe
the whole genome, proteome, and metabolome of a cell over the course of its life cycle in a fine-
grained dynamical model [77], as was first demonstrated in the human pathogen Mycoplasma

genitalium [78]. More recent efforts have been focused on identifying minimal genomes [79]
or modeling organisms with larger genomes, such as E. Coli [80]. Currently, the biomedical
application of such detailed models is limited by the enormous effort required to construct

them. Fortunately, it is often the case that only specific processes need to be incorporated to
build a medically relevant digital twin. Narrowing the focus of the model at the cellular level
makes model construction and personalization more feasible, lowers computational barriers,

and facilitates embedding these models into multicellular models, e.g. [81].
   An interesting focus is given by single cell data analysis. Indeed, tissues are complex multi-
agent systems made of multiple subpopulations of cells that, even of the same type, exhibit dif-

ferent system state and expression profiles and that are spatially and temporally organized and
able to communicate and interact with each other and to orchestrate self-assembly and response


                                                10
to stimuli as a whole. This is fundamental in many biological contexts, such as early embryonic
development and tumor etiology, where different cells are characterized by distinctive genetic

mutations and/or expression profiles. These differences are regulated by cell-to-cell communi-
cation and underlie complex dynamic responses characterizing healthy and pathological tissue
development [82]. An example of how the interaction between cells can be modelled to describe

emergent behaviors is provided by agent-based models applied to study the interaction dynam-
ics between immune and tumor cells in human cancer. Coupling a discrete agent-based model
with a continuous partial differential equations-based model, these models capture essential

components of the tumor microenvironment and are able to reproduce its main characteristics.
Each tumor is characterized by a specific and unique tumor microenvironment, emphasizing
the need for specialized and personalized studies of each cancer scenario. Recently, a model

of colon cancer has been proposed that can be informed with patient transcriptomic data [83].
It would be interesting to extend the model by informing it through methods that infer cellular
communication [84, 85, 86, 87]. This would have the advantage of characterizing the tumor

environment more specifically by defining the probability of an agent’s action in response to
received communication.
   At the tissue scale, neural, cardiovascular, and respiratory systems are a few examples of

systems that need to be considered. However, system dysfunctions, such as cancer, should
also be incorporated. Several studies have focused on examining neural connections within an
organism’s brain, commonly referred to as the connectome [88]. Whether investigating the in-

tricate networks within the human brain or the simpler wiring maps of organisms like C. elegans
or Drosophila Melanogaster, the objective remains consistent: elucidating the interconnections
and organization of neurons and regions at the mesoscale. Functional imaging techniques are

utilized to explore the relationship between activity in specific brain areas [89]. The analyti-
cal and computational tools from network theory allow to build maps of structural and func-


                                              11
tional connections, revealing characteristics of complex networks—such as small-world topol-
ogy, highly connected hubs, and modularity—that manifest at both the whole-brain and cellular

scales [90, 91, 92].
   The human brain is an emblematic case study for the design of ambitious computational
models towards digital twins. Nevertheless, despite the aforementioned significant advance-

ments, the explicit goal of building a realistic computer simulation of the brain within a few
years has not met expectations [93].
   Overall, the aforementioned sub-systems are part of a broader complex, adaptive, interde-

pendent system of systems which are organized in hierarchies of increasing complexity with
modular organization [94]. This is a fact well recognized since at least half a century, sum-
marized in the Jacob’s statement that “every object that biology studies is a system of sys-

tems” [95]. Such sub-systems exchange information (e.g., in terms of electrical, chemical and
electrochemical signals) to regulate each other and operate out of equilibrium [96, 97, 98].
   Consequently, considering any sub-system in isolation from the other ones provides an in-

complete representation of each sub-system, leading to inaccurate models and predictions of
biological processes. A partial solution to this problem comes from the statistical physics of
multilayer systems, allowing one to describe each scale by a level of organization, whereas each

level (i.e., at the same scale) can be characterized by multiple contexts, namely layers [99, 39].
Levels can be interdependent with each other [38, 100] while being characterized by different
contexts. In the case of biological systems [101], this is reflected in the distinct type of in-

teractions among the same set of biomolecules or the distinct channels available for cell-cell
communication, as well as in the interdependence between distinct systems such as the cardio-
vascular and nervous ones (Fig. 2).

   This web of interconnections and interdependencies involving diverse and heterogeneous
functional biological units across scales play a pivotal role in human health, and it is plausible


                                               12
                                          Multiscale                       Interdependence
 (A)                        mRNA          Systems
                                                                  (B)      between Systems
                         Intervention                                                                                   Digital Twins specialized by
                                                                                                                       biological sub-system / scale



                       Drug                                                              s                        s
                                                                                 ne                      ne
                   Intervention                                                Ge                      Ge

                                                                                      ns                      ns
                                                     Genetic                      tei                      tei
                                                    Regulatory                Pro                     Pro
                                                     Network                             s                         s
                                                                                     ay                       ay
                                                                               thw                      thw
                                                                             Pa                       Pa
                                                                                             es
                                                                                        ps                       lls
                                                                                    na                      Ce
                                                                              Sy

                                        Metabolic                                    its                    se
                                                                                                                 ls
                                                                                 cu                      s
                                        Network                               Cir                     Ve




                    Cellular
                    Network




                                                                 Digital Twins specialized by organ




Figure 2: Multiscale and network modeling for digital twins. (A) Once the potential source
of a dysfunction is identified, multiple biological systems might be involved, across differ-
ent spatial and temporal scales. Treatments, e.g., being based either on mRNA therapy or on
classical drugs, usually target biological units at a specific scale. However, their effects might
propagate to other units at the same scale or across scales due to the presence of interactions and
interdependencies among biomolecules and functional sub-systems such as cells. (B) A mul-
tiscale illustration of the interdependent sub-systems related to the function of distinct organs.
Each scale can be simulated by a specialized digital twin, or their multiscale integration can be
simulated by a more complex, but still specialized, digital twin. The effects of distinct treat-
ments can be analyzed on several distinct instances of the digital twins using model-informed
and data-driven search. Human body design by Freepick and osteocytes from Servier Medical
Art under CC-BY AS license.

to associate their dysfunction to disease states [102, 103].


Challenges in multiscale modeling

Multiscale modeling of biological systems presents formidable challenges, primarily due to the

intricate and redundant networks of interactions and interdependent processes taking place and


                                                                     13
unfolding across different scales, from molecular (microscopic) to organismic (macroscopic)
levels. These systems are characterized by dynamic processes that operate far from equilib-

rium, exchanging various types of signals – e.g., chemical, electrochemical, and more – thereby
creating a complex ecosystem of interlinked dynamical processes [34]. Such complexity poses
significant difficulties in developing models that are both significant and coherent, avoiding ex-

tremes like reductionism, which assumes that sufficient computational power can simulate an
entire organism, or oversimplification, which relies excessively on abundant data to sidestep the
need for intricate modeling.

   Moreover, biological systems are inherently adaptive, adjusting dynamically to environmen-
tal changes [104]. This adaptiveness is crucial for accurately simulating the impact of external
factors such as therapeutic interventions or changes in environmental conditions like pollu-

tion [105] or alterations in food sources [106, 107]. Responses to these changes start at the
cellular level, influencing gene and protein expressions (or lack of, that can even trigger the in-
surgence of cancer [108]), and extend to higher biological structures through complex signaling

pathways involving ligands and receptors. Such adaptive complexity must be integrated into
models to accurately reflect the biological response to external stimuli within the spatial and
temporal scale of interest.

   In the broader context of precision medicine, integrating digital twins that reflect these mul-
tiscale and adaptive features poses even additional challenges. The models often employed
are predominantly phenomenological, focusing more on observed phenomena rather than the

underlying mechanisms, an approach resulting in a significant gap in our mechanistic under-
standing, which is essential for bridging various biological scales effectively. Drawing again a
parallel with urban system digital twins might offer new perspectives and strategies: cities face

similar multiscale integration challenges [27] and require a similar framework for addressing
the complex interplay of different components within a living system, potentially guiding the


                                                14
development of more effective biomedical models.
   By critically analyzing these challenges through the lens of complexity science, we can bet-

ter understand and possibly overcome the hurdles in creating cohesive and predictive multiscale
models that are crucial for the future of biomedical research and therapeutic development. In the
case of interconnected systems at a given scale, one can introduce a suitable object named mul-
                          iα
tilayer adjacency tensor Mjβ (t), to operationally encode all the interactions at time t between a
biological unit i (e.g., a single protein or a protein complex) in a layer α (e.g., a class of biologi-
cal processes or a pathway) and another biological unit j (e.g., another protein or a metabolite).

The framework is so general that it allows to include also cross-layer structural interactions,
if any. In fact, due to the high number of interacting units (such as biomolecules, cells, etc),
biological modeling often assumes such deterministic processes, such as that reactions occur at

constant rates, compartmental interactions are fully-mixed or mean-field approximations apply.
Therefore, even at some good level of approximation, the dynamics of some quantity x(t) of
interest – e.g., the concentration of metabolites or the population of some species (e.g., cancer

cells, bacteria, etc) – might be described by multilayer differential equations [109, 39] like

               ∂xjβ (t)                   XX     h
                                                   iα
                                                                              i
                        = fjβ (xjβ , t) +     gjβ Mjβ (t), xiα (t), xjβ (t), t ,                   (1)
                 ∂t                       i α


where fjβ (·) is a function only of the variable xjβ (t) corresponding to a specific unit j in a
specific context or layer β, whereas gjβ (·) is a function accounting for the interactions between
pairs of units, i.e., for the effects due to the intervening networks.

   It is remarkable how such a simplified deterministic framework can allow to model some
response to clinical treatment triggered by basic chemical reactions, as well as that the value
of PH, the actions of cells that can be triggered and even the production of proteins that can

be stimulated by acting on specific part of DNA or by specific mRNA targets [110, 111]. In
the light of these simple arguments, it might be tempting to rely only on such deterministic ap-


                                                  15
proaches – based on sets of differential equations, such as Eq. (1), or on agent-based modeling –
to predict the behavior of a therapeutic intervention. After all, if we have systematic cause-effect

relations linking interventions to biological and clinical outcomes, it would be enough to cali-
brate our models on the specific features of a patient to determine their response to treatments
and potentially cure a disease.

   However, in complex and variable environments such as a living organism, adaptiveness,
randomness and biological noise might affect the model outcomes. Adaptiveness can be still
reflected by such simplified models: if we indicate with ujβ (t) some external input signal or

control applied to a biological system and with Θ the set of parameters that dynamically change
based on the system’s states or external inputs, then a more general model at a given scale could
be formalized as



           ∂xjβ (t)                   XX     h
                                               iα
                                                                                      i
                    = fjβ (xjβ , t) +     gjβ Mjβ (t), xiα (t), xjβ (t), Θ, ujβ (t), t
             ∂t                       i α
             iα
          ∂Mjβ  (t)       iα
                    = ℓ(Mjβ  (t), Θ, ujβ (t), t)
            ∂t
           ∂Θ(t)
                    = h(Θ, ujβ (t), t)                                                          (2)
              ∂t

which is much more complicated than Eq. (1), but it can be still managed from a computational
point of view.
   Noise can be inherent to one or more aspects of the involved systems – e.g., biochemical

and electrochemical variability – or being linked to specific mechanisms altered by internal or
external perturbations, such as virus-host interactions, environmental changes, so forth and so
on. Accordingly, including the effects of noise depends on the scale and impact of the biological

process being modeled. For instance, including DNA replication errors for the analysis of short-
term effects of a therapeutic drug might not add relevant biological or clinical insights, while
adding complexity to the model. Another emblematic case is the use of discretized structures,

                                                16
such as networks, to model processes that are manifestly continuous (e.g., in space): in such
conditions, using complex networks will introduce a level of sophistication that is not necessary

to gain insights about a biological process.
   These noise sources introduce an additional level of stochasticity that cannot be easily taken
into account by statistical models, even the most sophisticated ones based on machine learning.

Nevertheless, what it usually assumed to be a bug might be a feature: as for other complex
systems in nature, stochasticity is indeed structured and can lead to self-organized behaviors and
processes [112, 113, 114]. The theory of nonlinear dynamical systems and the statistical physics

of complex networks provide suitable theoretical and computational frameworks to model such
complex biological phenomena [98], and should be considered as essential ingredients to design
reliable digital twins, either specialized or not, for any living organism.

   Nevertheless, the most important obstacle to describe realistic biological systems relies on
incorporating multiple dynamic processes across the multiple intervening scales, primarily due
to the diverse nature of the laws governing these processes at each scale. One significant tech-

nical challenges is effectively bridging these scales. This involves not just scaling up or down
the processes, but also ensuring that interactions between scales are accurately captured. This
might involve developing intermediate models or using scale-bridging techniques like homog-

enization or coarse-graining, which themselves can introduce approximation errors or require
simplifications that might affect model accuracy. While some models are based on fundamental
laws – such as reaction-diffusion processes for chemical networks – other models are genuinely

phenomenological: reconciling dynamics of so different nature is challenging, since the lat-
ter class of models might not be suitable to capture novel phenomenology. This problem can
only be partially solved by developing more fundamental models, since biological processes

are characterized by emergent phenomena that cannot be directly deduced even from having
full knowledge about their units and their interactions [28, 29, 30, 32]. To this aim, one needs


                                                17
to account, simultaneously, for the evolution of the system according to dynamics similar to
the one in Eq. (2) and the fact that the underlying mechanisms can change while satisfying the

constraints imposed by physics and chemistry, requiring meta-dynamical models [115].
   Additionally, multiscale models often require extensive parameterization, which can be dif-
ficult when experimental data are scarce at certain scales: therefore, validating these models

across all scales can be exceptionally challenging, especially when direct observations or ex-
periments at certain scales are not feasible or provide, at best, indirect measurements (such
as correlations) about the phenomenon of interest that require an adequate inferential frame-

work [116].
   Furthermore, such models should be able to propagate perturbations from one scale to an-
other to realistically mimic the behavior of a living organism. As previously discussed, the

possibility that a perturbation at the lowest scale (e.g., a random mutation or a mRNA interven-
tion) can alter biological processes at larger scales is a mandatory feature for any reliable design
of a digital twin.


Discussion and outlooks

Innovative approaches for model integration within digital twins have a huge transformative po-

tential for applications to precision medicine, enabling a synergy between generative modeling,
advanced AI and machine learning techniques, and traditional biomedical insights. The fusion
of these techniques, rather than the choice of a specific one, is expected to facilitate the devel-

opment of new frameworks for multiscale modeling, which are pivotal in capturing the intricate
dynamics of pathogenesis in humans. Through these frameworks, the overarching goal is to

resolve the previously identified challenges, significantly enhancing the accuracy and clinical
relevance of digital twins beyond inductive modelling via advanced statistics.
   On the one hand, the integration of mechanistic models into digital twins also addresses the

                                                18
challenges of parameter indeterminacy and overfitting, which are prevalent in systems charac-
terized by vast parameter spaces. By constraining these spaces, e.g. via the coarse-grained dy-

namics afforded by multiscale automata network models that synthesize large-scale data about
biological mechanisms, digital twins not only gain in robustness and explainability but also of-
fer a more reliable foundation for the simulation of therapeutic outcomes, thereby increasing

their utility in clinical practice.
    On the other hand, it is also worth discussing what is missing in current technologies and
techniques developed for the same aim. For instance, a critical advantage of digital twins over

state-of-the-art non-computational models, such as organoids [117], is their capability to sim-
ulate complex, interdependent processes across multiple biological scales effectively, while
providing explanatory and causal understanding and control at relatively small costs. While

organoids can be engineered with all the power of modern synthetic biology [118] to recapit-
ulate features of the function and responses of complex biological mechanisms of the corre-
sponding in vivo target, they have important limitations. Certainly, reproducibility is a major

bottleneck [119], where digital twins can excel, especially if built under an open-source frame-
work. Additionally, organoids do not yet capture the entire physiological repertoire of cell types,
even the behavior that is relevant for a particular disease. This means, for instance, that the re-

sponse to drugs or other interventions need to be studied for organoids per se, separately from
the in vivo target. Related to this problem, is the relatively limited range of heterogeneity in re-
sponse, which one needs to develop true personalized twins [119]. Finally, while organoids are

more direct analogues of biomolecular mechanisms, they cannot incorporate simultaneously the
multiple scales and historical information about patients, including the microbiome and expo-
some, which are major factors in complex diseases such as cancer, depression and many chronic

diseases. This is where the comprehensive multiscale network- and data-driven digital twin
approach is particularly crucial. Many complex diseases unfold across various multiomic sub-


                                                19
systems and exposome history. Modular computational architectures that can synthesize and
integrate multiple subsystems as separate network layers or agent-based models are well within

the realm of possibility. They might require a robust non-specialized digital twin, effectively in-
tegrating different specialized ones, to accommodate complex interactions and interdependency
of biological and exposome processes. while non-specialized may not allow individual patient

precision, such approach could still increase precision to specific cohorts rather than the whole
population. For diseases with more circumscribed features, however, specialized digital twins
might offer a targeted and streamlined alternative, allowing for precise intervention strategies

and outcome predictions that might perform as well or better than those based on organoids.
   Another remarkable advantage of digital twins is that they allow a scenario-based modeling
approach for actionable interventions – akin to strategies routinely used in epidemic modeling

for policy decision-making [120] – that enhances their applicability and safety in clinical set-
tings. This method avoids the standard pitfalls of an oracle-like predictive model by allowing
for the exploration – via direct simulation – of multiple clinical scenarios, thereby providing a

robust tool for decision support in personalized medicine. The integration with massive data
sets about disease or treatment progressions, providing a reliable statistical samples that can be
stratified to approximate the characterizing features of a patient, will be crucial to validate the

output of models.
   Therefore, the expected output of such a machinery, model-informed and data-driven, would
not just be a yes/no decision about the adoption of a therapeutic strategy or an intervention, but a

whole spectrum of alternatives where advantages and disadvantages in adopting each plausible
strategy are outlined to inform human decision-making.




                                                20
References and Notes

 [1] Mirnezami, R., Nicholson, J. & Darzi, A. Preparing for precision medicine. N Engl J
     Med 366, 489–491 (2012).

 [2] Barabási, A.-L., Gulbahce, N. & Loscalzo, J. Network medicine: a network-based ap-

     proach to human disease. Nature reviews genetics 12, 56–68 (2011).

 [3] König, I. R., Fuchs, O., Hansen, G., von Mutius, E. & Kopp, M. V. What is precision
     medicine? European respiratory journal 50 (2017).

 [4] Collins, F. S. & Varmus, H. A new initiative on precision medicine. New England journal
     of medicine 372, 793–795 (2015).

 [5] Lu, C. Y., Terry, V. & Thomas, D. M. Precision medicine: affording the successes of

     science. NPJ Precision Oncology 7, 3 (2023).

 [6] Wong, E. et al. The singapore national precision medicine strategy. Nature Genetics 55,

     178–186 (2023).

 [7] Ashley, E. A. Towards precision medicine. Nature Reviews Genetics 17, 507–522 (2016).

 [8] Chen, R. & Snyder, M. Promise of personalized omics to precision medicine. Wiley
     Interdisciplinary Reviews: Systems Biology and Medicine 5, 73–82 (2013).

 [9] Hoffman, J. M., Flynn, A. J., Juskewitch, J. E. & Freimuth, R. R. Biomedical data
     science and informatics challenges to implementing pharmacogenomics with electronic

     health records. Annual Review of Biomedical Data Science 3, 289–314 (2020).




                                            21
[10] Venkatesh, K. P., Brito, G. & Kamel Boulos, M. N. Health digital twins in life science
     and health care innovation. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 64, 159–170

     (2024).

[11] Jensen, P. B., Jensen, L. J. & Brunak, S. Mining electronic health records: towards better
     research applications and clinical care. Nature Reviews Genetics 13, 395–405 (2012).

[12] Correia, R. B., Wood, I. B., Bollen, J. & Rocha, L. M. Mining social media data for
     biomedical signals and health-related behavior. Annual review of biomedical data science

     3, 433–458 (2020).

[13] Hucka, M. et al. The systems biology markup language (sbml): a medium for repre-
     sentation and exchange of biochemical network models. Bioinformatics 19, 524–531
     (2003).

[14] Hunter, P. J. & Borg, T. K. Integration from proteins to organs: the physiome project.

     Nature reviews Molecular cell biology 4, 237–243 (2003).

[15] Björnsson, B. et al. Digital twins to personalize medicine. Genome medicine 12, 1–4
     (2020).

[16] Erol, T., Mendi, A. F. & Doğan, D. The digital twin revolution in healthcare. In 2020
     4th international symposium on multidisciplinary studies and innovative technologies

     (ISMSIT), 1–7 (IEEE, 2020).

[17] Eddy, D. M. & Schlessinger, L. Validation of the archimedes diabetes model. Diabetes
     Care 26, 3102–3110 (2003). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.2337/diacare.
     26.11.3102.




                                             22
[18] Corral-Acero, J. et al. The ‘digital twin’ to enable the vision of precision cardiology.
     European Heart Journal 41, 4556–4564 (2020). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.

     1093/eurheartj/ehaa159.

[19] Coorey, G., Figtree, G. A., Fletcher, D. F. & Redfern, J. The health digital twin: advanc-
     ing precision cardiovascular medicine. Nature Reviews Cardiology 18, 803–804 (2021).

[20] Laubenbacher, R., Sluka, J. P. & Glazier, J. A. Using digital twins in viral infection.
     Science 371, 1105–1106 (2021).

[21] Laubenbacher, R., Mehrad, B., Shmulevich, I. & Trayanova, N.             Digital twins in

     medicine. Nature Computational Science 4, 184–191 (2024).

[22] Kamel Boulos, M. N. & Zhang, P. Digital twins: From personalised medicine to precision
     public health. Journal of Personalized Medicine 11, 745 (2021). URL http://dx.
     doi.org/10.3390/jpm11080745.

[23] Matheny, M. E., Whicher, D. & Thadaney Israni, S. Artificial intelligence in health

     care: A report from the national academy of medicine. JAMA 323, 509 (2020). URL
     http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2019.21579.

[24] Batty, M. Inventing future cities (The MIT Press, Boston, USA, 2018).

[25] Grieves, M. W. Product lifecycle management: the new paradigm for enterprises. Inter-
     national Journal of Product Development 2, 71–84 (2005). URL https://ideas.

     repec.org/a/ids/ijpdev/v2y2005i1-2p71-84.html.

[26] Niederer, S. A., Sacks, M. S., Girolami, M. & Willcox, K. Scaling digital twins from
     the artisanal to the industrial. Nature Computational Science 1, 313–320 (2021). URL
     https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-021-00072-5.

                                             23
[27] Caldarelli, G. et al. The role of complexity for digital twins of cities. Nature Computa-
     tional Science 3, 374–381 (2023).

[28] Gell-Mann, M.     Complex adaptive systems.      In SANTA FE INSTITUTE STUDIES

     IN THE SCIENCES OF COMPLEXITY-PROCEEDINGS VOLUME-, vol. 19, 17–17
     (ADDISON-WESLEY PUBLISHING CO, 1994).

[29] Holland, J. H. Complex adaptive systems and spontaneous emergence. In Complexity
     and Industrial Clusters: Dynamics and Models in Theory and Practice, 25–34 (Springer,

     2002).

[30] Holland, J. H. Studying complex adaptive systems. Journal of systems science and

     complexity 19, 1–8 (2006).

[31] Kamel Boulos, M. N. & Zhang, P. Digital twins: from personalised medicine to precision
     public health. Journal of personalized medicine 11, 745 (2021).

[32] Artime, O. & De Domenico, M. From the origin of life to pandemics: Emergent phe-
     nomena in complex systems (2022).

[33] Rosen, R. On complex systems. European Journal of Operational Research 30, 129–134

     (1987).

[34] Lopatkin, A. J. & Collins, J. J. Predictive biology: modelling, understanding and har-
     nessing microbial complexity. Nature Reviews Microbiology 18, 507–520 (2020).

[35] Vermeulen, R., Schymanski, E. L., Barabási, A.-L. & Miller, G. W. The exposome and
     health: Where chemistry meets biology. Science 367, 392–396 (2020).

[36] Vineis, P. et al. What is new in the exposome? Environment international 143, 105887
     (2020).

                                             24
[37] Steinhubl, S. R., Muse, E. D. & Topol, E. J. The emerging field of mobile health. Science
     translational medicine 7, 283rv3–283rv3 (2015).

[38] Buldyrev, S. V., Parshani, R., Paul, G., Stanley, H. E. & Havlin, S. Catastrophic cascade

     of failures in interdependent networks. Nature 464, 1025–1028 (2010).

[39] De Domenico, M. More is different in real-world multilayer networks. Nature Physics
     19, 1247–1262 (2023).

[40] Sánchez-Valle, J. et al. Prevalence and differences in the co-administration of drugs
     known to interact: an analysis of three distinct and large populations. BMC medicine 22,

     166 (2024).

[41] Dolley, S. Big data’s role in precision public health. Frontiers in public health 6, 297813
     (2018).

[42] Núñez-Carpintero, I. et al. Rare disease research workflow using multilayer networks
     elucidates the molecular determinants of severity in congenital myasthenic syndromes.

     Nature Communications 15, 1227 (2024).

[43] Pescosolido, B. A. et al. The social symbiome framework1: Linking genes-to-global
     cultures in public health using network science. In Handbook of applied system science,
     25–48 (Routledge, 2016).

[44] Walpole, J., Papin, J. A. & Peirce, S. M. Multiscale computational models of complex

     biological systems. Annual review of biomedical engineering 15, 137–154 (2013).

[45] Correia, R. B. et al. The conserved transcriptional program of metazoan male germ cells
     uncovers ancient origins of human infertility. eLife In Press. Biorxiv: 2022.03.02.482557
     (2024).

                                              25
[46] Kennedy, K. E. et al. Multiscale networks in multiple sclerosis. PLOS Computational
     Biology 20, e1010980 (2024).

[47] Thattai, M. & Van Oudenaarden, A. Intrinsic noise in gene regulatory networks. Pro-

     ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98, 8614–8619 (2001).

[48] Levine, M. & Davidson, E. H. Gene regulatory networks for development. Proceedings

     of the National Academy of Sciences 102, 4936–4942 (2005).

[49] Davidson, E. & Levin, M. Gene regulatory networks. Proceedings of the National
     Academy of Sciences 102, 4935–4935 (2005).

[50] Karlebach, G. & Shamir, R. Modelling and analysis of gene regulatory networks. Nature
     reviews Molecular cell biology 9, 770–780 (2008).

[51] Vazquez, A., Flammini, A., Maritan, A. & Vespignani, A. Global protein function pre-

     diction from protein-protein interaction networks. Nature biotechnology 21, 697–700
     (2003).

[52] Szklarczyk, D. et al. String v10: protein–protein interaction networks, integrated over
     the tree of life. Nucleic acids research 43, D447–D452 (2015).

[53] Han, J.-D. J. et al. Evidence for dynamically organized modularity in the yeast protein–

     protein interaction network. Nature 430, 88–93 (2004).

[54] Han, J.-D. J., Dupuy, D., Bertin, N., Cusick, M. E. & Vidal, M. Effect of sampling on

     topology predictions of protein-protein interaction networks. Nature biotechnology 23,
     839–844 (2005).

[55] Stelzl, U. et al. A human protein-protein interaction network: a resource for annotating
     the proteome. Cell 122, 957–968 (2005).

                                            26
[56] Deeds, E. J., Ashenberg, O. & Shakhnovich, E. I. A simple physical model for scaling in
     protein-protein interaction networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

     103, 311–316 (2006).

[57] Stelzl, U. & Wanker, E. E. The value of high quality protein–protein interaction networks
     for systems biology. Current opinion in chemical biology 10, 551–558 (2006).

[58] Dittrich, M. T., Klau, G. W., Rosenwald, A., Dandekar, T. & Müller, T. Identifying func-
     tional modules in protein–protein interaction networks: an integrated exact approach.

     Bioinformatics 24, i223–i231 (2008).

[59] Nepusz, T., Yu, H. & Paccanaro, A. Detecting overlapping protein complexes in protein-
     protein interaction networks. Nature methods 9, 471–472 (2012).

[60] Jeong, H., Tombor, B., Albert, R., Oltvai, Z. N. & Barabási, A.-L. The large-scale
     organization of metabolic networks. Nature 407, 651–654 (2000).

[61] Liu, Y.-Y., Slotine, J.-J. & Barabási, A.-L. Observability of complex systems. Proceed-

     ings of the National Academy of Sciences 110, 2460–2465 (2013).

[62] Guimera, R. & Nunes Amaral, L. A. Functional cartography of complex metabolic net-
     works. nature 433, 895–900 (2005).

[63] Mackey, M. C., Santillán, M., Tyran-Kamińska, M. & Zeron, E. S. Simple Mathematical
     Models of Gene Regulatory Dynamics. Lecture Notes on Mathematical Modelling in the

     Life Sciences (Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016).

[64] Gates, A. J., Brattig Correia, R., Wang, X. & Rocha, L. M. The effective graph reveals
     redundancy, canalization, and control pathways in biochemical regulation and signaling.
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, e2022598118 (2021).

                                             27
[65] Schwab, J. D., Kühlwein, S. D., Ikonomi, N., Kühl, M. & Kestler, H. A. Concepts in
     Boolean network modeling: What do they all mean?          Computational and Structural

     Biotechnology Journal 18, 571–582 (2020).

[66] Rozum, J. C., Campbell, C., Newby, E., Nasrollahi, F. S. F. & Albert, R. Boolean Net-
     works as Predictive Models of Emergent Biological Behaviors. Elements in the Structure
     and Dynamics of Complex Networks (2024).

[67] Marques-Pita, M. & Rocha, L. M. Canalization and control in automata networks: body

     segmentation in drosophila melanogaster. PloS one 8, e55946 (2013).

[68] Gómez Tejeda Zañudo, J. et al. Cell Line–Specific Network Models of ER+ Breast Can-
     cer Identify Potential PI3Kα Inhibitor Resistance Mechanisms and Drug Combinations.
     Cancer Research 81, 4603–4617 (2021).

[69] Folkesson, E., Sakshaug, B. C., Hoel, A. D., Klinkenberg, G. & Flobak, Å. Synergis-
     tic effects of complex drug combinations in colorectal cancer cells predicted by logical
     modelling. Frontiers in Systems Biology 3 (2023).

[70] Calzone, L., Noël, V., Barillot, E., Kroemer, G. & Stoll, G. Modeling signaling pathways

     in biology with MaBoSS: From one single cell to a dynamic population of heterogeneous
     interacting cells. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 20, 5661–5671
     (2022).

[71] Montagud, A. et al. Patient-specific Boolean models of signalling networks guide per-

     sonalised treatments. eLife 11, e72626 (2022).

[72] Manicka, S., Marques-Pita, M. & Rocha, L. M. Effective connectivity determines the
     critical dynamics of biochemical networks. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 19,
     20210659 (2022).

                                             28
[73] Costa, F. X., Rozum, J. C., Marcus, A. M. & Rocha, L. M. Effective connectivity and
     bias entropy improve prediction of dynamical regime in automata networks. Entropy 25,

     374 (2023).

[74] Rocha, L. M. On the feasibility of dynamical analysis of network models of biochemical
     regulation. Bioinformatics 38, 3674–3675 (2022).

[75] Rozum, J. C., Deritei, D., Park, K. H., Gómez Tejeda Zañudo, J. & Albert, R. Pys-
     tablemotifs: Python library for attractor identification and control in Boolean networks.

     Bioinformatics 38, 1465–1466 (2022).

[76] Beneš, N. et al. AEON.py: Python library for attractor analysis in asynchronous Boolean
     networks. Bioinformatics 38, 4978–4980 (2022).

[77] Bhat, N. G. & Balaji, S. Whole-Cell Modeling and Simulation: A Brief Survey. New
     Generation Computing 38, 259–281 (2020).

[78] Karr, J. R. et al. A Whole-Cell Computational Model Predicts Phenotype from Genotype.

     Cell 150, 389–401 (2012).

[79] Rees-Garbutt, J. et al. Designing minimal genomes using whole-cell models. Nature
     Communications 11, 836 (2020).

[80] Sun, G., Ahn-Horst, T. A. & Covert, M. W. The E. coli Whole-Cell Modeling Project.
     EcoSal Plus 9, eESP–0001–2020 (2021).

[81] Ponce-de-Leon, M. et al. PhysiBoSS 2.0: A sustainable integration of stochastic Boolean

     and agent-based modelling frameworks. npj Systems Biology and Applications 9, 1–12
     (2023).



                                            29
[82] Shalek, A. K. et al. Single-cell rna-seq reveals dynamic paracrine control of cellu-
     lar variation. Nature 510, 363–369 (2014). URL https://www.nature.com/

     articles/nature13437.

[83] Cesaro, G. et al. Mast: a hybrid multi-agent spatio-temporal model of tumor microenvi-
     ronment informed using a data-driven approach. Bioinformatics Advances 2, vbac092
     (2022).   URL https://academic.oup.com/bioinformaticsadvances/

     article/2/1/vbac092/6873756.

[84] Baruzzo, G., Cesaro, G. & Di Camillo, B.            Identify, quantify and character-
     ize cellular communication from single-cell rna sequencing data with scseqcomm.

     Bioinformatics 38, 1920–1929 (2022).        URL https://academic.oup.com/
     bioinformatics/article/38/7/1920/6511439.

[85] Kumar, M. P. et al. Analysis of single-cell rna-seq identifies cell-cell communication

     associated with tumor characteristics. Cell reports 25, 1458–1468 (2018). URL https:
     //www.cell.com/cell-reports/pdf/S2211-1247(18)31636-X.pdf.

[86] Puram, S. V. et al. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of primary and metastatic tumor
     ecosystems in head and neck cancer. Cell 171, 1611–1624 (2017). URL https://

     www.cell.com/cell/pdf/S0092-8674(17)31270-9.pdf.

[87] Zhang, Q. et al. Landscape and dynamics of single immune cells in hepatocellular car-
     cinoma. Cell 179, 829–845 (2019). URL https://www.cell.com/cell/pdf/

     S0092-8674(19)31119-5.pdf.

[88] Sporns, O., Tononi, G. & Kötter, R. The Human Connectome: A Structural Description
     of the Human Brain. PLoS Comput. Biol. 1, e42 (2005). URL http://dx.plos.
     org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010042.

                                            30
[89] Bullmore, E. & Sporns, O. Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of
     structural and functional systems.   Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 186–198 (2009).       URL

     https://www.nature.com/articles/nrn2575.

[90] Sporns, O., Tononi, G. & Edelman, G. M. Theoretical neuroanatomy and the connectivity
     of the cerebral cortex. Behav. Brain Res. 135, 69–74 (2002). URL https://www.
     sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166432802001572.

[91] Sporns, O., Chialvo, D. R., Kaiser, M. & Hilgetag, C. C. Organization, development and

     function of complex brain networks. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 418–425 (2004).

[92] Chialvo, D. R. Emergent complex neural dynamics. Nat. Phys. 6, 744–750 (2010). URL

     https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys1803.

[93] Siva, N. What happened to the Human Brain Project? Lancet 402, 1408–1409 (2023).
     URL https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02346-2.

[94] Wagner, G. P., Pavlicev, M. & Cheverud, J. M. The road to modularity. Nature Reviews
     Genetics 8, 921–931 (2007).

[95] Jacob, F. The logic of living systems: A history of heredity (Allen Lane. First edition,

     1974).

[96] Haken, H. Cooperative phenomena in systems far from thermal equilibrium and in non-
     physical systems. Reviews of modern physics 47, 67 (1975).

[97] Ritort, F. Nonequilibrium fluctuations in small systems: From physics to biology. Ad-
     vances in chemical physics 137, 31 (2008).

[98] Fang, X., Kruse, K., Lu, T. & Wang, J. Nonequilibrium physics in biology. Reviews of
     Modern Physics 91, 045004 (2019).

                                            31
 [99] De Domenico, M. et al. Mathematical formulation of multilayer networks. Physical
      Review X 3, 041022 (2013).

[100] Gao, J., Buldyrev, S. V., Stanley, H. E. & Havlin, S. Networks formed from interdepen-

      dent networks. Nature physics 8, 40–48 (2012).

[101] De Domenico, M. Multilayer network modeling of integrated biological systems. com-
      ment on” network science of biological systems at different scales: A review” by gosak
      et al. Physics of Life Reviews 24, 149–152 (2018).

[102] Greene, J. A. & Loscalzo, J. Putting the patient back together—social medicine, network

      medicine, and the limits of reductionism (2017).

[103] Halu, A., De Domenico, M., Arenas, A. & Sharma, A. The multiplex network of human
      diseases. NPJ systems biology and applications 5, 15 (2019).

[104] Freeman, W. J., Kozma, R. & Werbos, P. J. Biocomplexity: adaptive behavior in complex
      stochastic dynamical systems. Biosystems 59, 109–123 (2001).

[105] Fuller, R. et al. Pollution and health: a progress update. The Lancet Planetary Health 6,

      e535–e547 (2022).

[106] van der Laan, L. J., Bosker, T. & Peijnenburg, W. J. Deciphering potential implications of
      dietary microplastics for human health. Nature Reviews Gastroenterology & Hepatology
      20, 340–341 (2023).

[107] Al Mamun, A., Prasetya, T. A. E., Dewi, I. R. & Ahmad, M. Microplastics in human

      food chains: Food becoming a threat to health safety. Science of the Total Environment
      858, 159834 (2023).



                                              32
[108] Parreno, V. et al.      Transient loss of polycomb components induces an epige-
      netic cancer fate.     Nature (2024).          URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/

      s41586-024-07328-w.

[109] De Domenico, M., Granell, C., Porter, M. A. & Arenas, A. The physics of spreading
      processes in multilayer networks. Nature Physics 12, 901–906 (2016).

[110] Kowalski, P. S., Rudra, A., Miao, L. & Anderson, D. G. Delivering the messenger:
      advances in technologies for therapeutic mrna delivery. Molecular Therapy 27, 710–728

      (2019).

[111] Rohner, E., Yang, R., Foo, K. S., Goedel, A. & Chien, K. R. Unlocking the promise of
      mrna therapeutics. Nature biotechnology 40, 1586–1600 (2022).

[112] Nicolis, G. & Prigogine, I. Self-organization in nonequilibrium systems: from dissipative
      structures to order through fluctuations. Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft für physikalis-

      che Chemie (1977).

[113] Heylighen, F. et al. The science of self-organization and adaptivity. The encyclopedia of
      life support systems 5, 253–280 (2001).

[114] Camazine, S. et al. Self-organization in biological systems. In Self-Organization in
      Biological Systems (Princeton university press, 2020).

[115] Bagley, R. J. et al. Modeling adaptive biological systems. Biosystems 23, 113–137

      (1989).

[116] Peel, L., Peixoto, T. P. & De Domenico, M. Statistical inference links data and theory in
      network science. Nature Communications 13, 6794 (2022).



                                                33
[117] Corrò, C., Novellasdemunt, L. & Li, V. S. A brief history of organoids. American Journal
      of Physiology-Cell Physiology 319, C151–C165 (2020).

[118] Hofer, M. & Lutolf, M. P. Engineering organoids. Nature Reviews Materials 6, 402–420

      (2021).

[119] Zhao, Z. et al. Organoids. Nature Reviews Methods Primers 2, 94 (2022).

[120] Hofman, J. M. et al. Integrating explanation and prediction in computational social
      science. Nature 595, 181–188 (2021).


Author contributions.     M.D.D. designed the research. M.D.D., L.A., G.C, V.dA., B.dC.,
L.R., J.R, R.S and F.Z wrote the manuscript.


Competing interests. The authors declare no competing interests.


Correspondence. Correspondence should be sent to manlio.dedomenico@unipd.it




                                               34
